# ExternalOntologyforCERF
The project for Group 3 of BIOT670I course from UMGC in Fall 2023
Runyu Wu, Kevin Scaife, Aeiman Zehra, Priscilla Do Amaral, Anthony Ford

This project was designed to accompany the CERF ELN software from Lab-Ally. The Collaborative Electronic Research Framework (CERF) software is an Electronic Laboratory Notebook (ELN) program that offers secure data management and allows users from multiple sites to capture, store, locate, retrieve, or share files and continuously manage, categorize, and organize the details of their ongoing research. CERF is compliant with 21 CFR 11 in the United States and can use either a CERF server (installed on-premise), or on other servers (e.g., Amazon). CERF offers a check-in and check-out feature which allows a user to check out a file from the server to their local drive. To maintain 21 CFR 11 compliance and to offer comprehensive version control, any changes for files that are checked back-in are tracked and saved in a version control library. The current project allows CERF users to add ontologies derived from BioPortal to files checked-out from CERF. The project offers the ability to add ontology terms directly to certain text-based bioinformatics files (.fasta, .fastq, .sam, .bam, .gff, and .vcf files) and also to modify the XML file (saved as ".cerf") to allow the CERF software to detect inserted ontologies and assign them to metadata fields on th server. 

This project is useful as it allows users to conveniently and systematically assign ontologies to files checked-out from CERF. This partners well with the semantic search engine embedded within CERF (ontology tagging allows users to search for files tagged with similar ontologies) and to offer systematic tagging using pre-existing ontologies on the BioPortal website. 

How users can get started with the project

To get started with the project, users will need to install Python (v3.7 or later) along with two libraries (flet and Biopython). To pair this program with CERF, a user would also need a license to use CERF. The program is initiated using the GUI python file or initiated using the compiled .exe. Upon launching the GUI, a user will need to select a file. If using alongside CERF, please direct this prompt towards the checked-out directory and select a file. After selecting a file, the first dialog box ("Select Ontology") accepts text input to identify a specific ontology search term (e.g., "melanoma"). The second dialog box ("Filter Ontology Search") accepts text input to identify an ontology repository (e.g., "Gene Ontology"), after which, the "Filter" button can be selected to populate the following dropdown menu. The dropdown menu ("List of available Ontologies") is then selected to show the available ontologies that match the search term entered in the second dialog box ("Filter Ontology Search"). After selecting an ontology, the "Search Terms" button can be selected to populate the final dropdown menu which displays the ontology terms matching the input from the first dialog box ("Select Ontology"). After selecting the ontology term, the term can be added to the XML file (denoted by ".cerf") from a checked-out file from CERF by selecting the "Add ontology to XM:" button. Certain text-based bioinformatics files (.fasta, .fastq, .sam, .bam, .gff, and .vcf) files can have ontologies added directly to the file by selecting a the "Add ontology to file" button. Optionally, the "Open BioPortal" button will open a web page, using the users default web browser, directed towards the webpage containing information on the selected ontology on BioPortal.   

For assistance, any of the contributors to this project (listed above) can be contacted or the CERF technical support team from Lab-Ally. 
